---
title: <Climate Claims: Tuvalu and Cliamte Refugees >
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---


In the article “Four Decades of Island Area Change Across Tuvalu” by CO2 Science, the author argues that Tuvalu residents are not in danger of becoming climate refugees (CO2 Science, 2020). The article acknowledges that this region of the Earth has been experiencing rising sea levels twice the rate compared to the rest of the world. The authors state up until now, many thought Tuvalu’s citizens would most likely become the world’s first climate refugees, as the rising waters will cause flooding. The argument is introduced by discussing a peer-reviewed article out of New Zealand. The New Zealand researchers used historical aerial photographs and satellite images with over 43 years of data to find most islands in the study area had experienced a net increase of area. Tuvalu has specifically had a net gain of 73.5 ha of land over that time period, equal to 2.9% of its land. The article concludes by saying that these observations show that the island is not threatened by climate change due to the increase of land and that “… climate alarmists have ridiculously portrayed Tuvalu”.  

This article was written and published by CO2 Science in December of 2020, making this a recent publication; however, the paper cited was originally published in 2018. The organization’s goal is to share new reports about increasing atmospheric CO2 and help readers understand the reality in the “emotionally charged debate of climate change.” The website presents the authors as well-educated individuals, most of whom have a Ph.D. on the topic of energy. Additionally, the writers have industry experience working for companies in the energy sector. I found this article intriguing as Tuvalu has long been the poster child for climate change, but this article stated otherwise. When I continued reading, I found the claim interesting as there was a peer-reviewed paper supporting the claims that the authors were making. However, upon further research, I think the CO2 Science claim is too good to be true. 

The study that CO2 Science cites shows that these islands are dynamic, and perhaps the threat of flooding to Tuvalu may be less severe than initially thought. However, I do not believe that it is valid to say Tuvalu is not threatened by climate change just because one study showed a net increase of land. In fact, some studies still think that the reef accretion rates may not be able to keep up with the rate of sea-level rise that the area is experiencing (Perry et al., 2018). The CO2 authors also failed to acknowledge that Tuvalu’s islands feel more than just on pressure from climate change. Storms can have devastating effects on the islands due to their small size and vulnerability. Many predict that as climate change increases the frequency and severity of storms, most of the atoll islands will become uninhabitable in a few decades (Storlazzi et al., 2018). Therefore, it is not accurate to state that just because land accretion may be faster than sea-level rise, Tuvalu is safe from the threat climate change poses. 

When one first evaluates the source “Four Decades of Island Area Change Across Tuvalu” one may believe that the article is reputable. However, after looking at the science behind the claims, it becomes clear that things do not add up, and the article lacks accuracy, validity and plausibility. Science points to say that the original claim may not be accurate, and climate change is multi-faceted. Unfortunately, a 2.9% land increase is most likely not enough to protect the vulnerable islands from climate change. The citizens of Tuvalu may still become the world’s first climate change refugees. 
 
## Works cited: 

CO2 Science, 2020. Four Decades of Island Area Change Across Tuvalu. CO2 Science. Available at: <http://www.co2science.org/articles/V23/dec/a7.php> [Accessed 25 Jan. 2021].

Perry, C.T., Alvarez-Filip, L., Graham, N.A.J., Mumby, P.J., Wilson, S.K., Kench, P.S., Manzello, D.P., Morgan, K.M., Slangen, A.B.A., Thomson, D.P., Januchowski-Hartley, F., Smithers, S.G., Steneck, R.S., Carlton, R., Edinger, E.N., Enochs, I.C., Estrada-Saldívar, N., Haywood, M.D.E., Kolodziej, G., Murphy, G.N., Pérez-Cervantes, E., Suchley, A., Valentino, L., Boenish, R., Wilson, M. and Macdonald, C., 2018. Loss of coral reef growth capacity to track future increases in sea level. Nature, 558(7710), pp.396–400.

Storlazzi, C.D., Gingerich, S.B., Dongeren, A. van, Cheriton, O.M., Swarzenski, P.W., Quataert, E., Voss, C.I., Field, D.W., Annamalai, H., Piniak, G.A. and McCall, R., 2018. Most atolls will be uninhabitable by the mid-21st century because of sea-level rise exacerbating wave-driven flooding. Science Advances, 4(4), p.eaap9741.
orci ultricies egestas luctus, mauris mauris luctus metus, placerat pulvinar libero erat id purus. Nullam a velit viverra mauris hendrerit viverra in at massa. Donec et porttitor ipsum, dapibus fermentum massa.

